---
title: May 4th 
layout: post
date: 2019-04-01
description: A complete post.
image: TEARGAS.jpg
categories: ["Chinese Revolutions"] ["Worker's Movements"]
---

# Header 1 May 4th

## The Birth of a Movement:
The date is May 4th, 1919. Over 4, 000 students from universities and colleges all around Beijing are marching in coordinated effort towards Tiananmen Square. As they march their aggressive political slogans fill the air: “Protect China’s Sovereignty!”; “Get Rid of the National Traitors!”

The students, a sea of faces and political banners, rally in Tiananmen Square, afterwards continuing their march to the embassy district of Beijing. Upon attempting to enter the district they find their path barred by lines of police. A two-hour standoff ensues; the police remain stubborn in preventing the march from continuing. Seeing their options limited, the students, passions still running high, turn towards a government official’s residence nearby.

The situation comes to a head when the furious students break into the residence, beating up the government official inside and setting fire to the building. The police respond by violently beating the students. The day ends with 32 students arrested - one student later dies from injuries sustained at the hands of the police - and the students dispersing.

This was the May 4th Incident, the act that inaugurated one of the greatest social movements in 20th Century China that would inspire many more - the anti-imperialist and radically democratic May 4th Movement.


## Imperialism and Nationalism:
The Beijing students had good reason to demonstrate that day on May 4th. They were immediately responding to a decision by the Paris Peace Conference, the forum for resolving the First World War that had ended a year prior. Though China was on the winning side of the war, the Western powers that dominated the conference decided that the island of Shandong - an island which had originally belonged to China and had been occupied before the war by the losing power Germany - would be granted to Japan rather than returned to China.

News of this development in the “Shandong problem” came off the back of decades of colonialism. Since the Qing dynasty Western imperialist powers had slowly stripped away China’s national sovereignty with the force of their military supremacy, imposing in its place self-interested exploitative practices. For example, upon winning the First Opium War Great Britain compelled China to accept the opium trade even as it ravaged China’s social order, forced the central government to sign ‘unequal treaties’ that opened up port-cities to foreign trade as well as privileged foreign nationals, and most famously appropriated Hong Kong as a colony. France, Russia and Germany did much the same to varying degrees. Indeed, the students were blocked from entering the embassy district by the police on May 4th precisely because of a 1901 ‘unequal treaty’ that banned Chinese people from marching in the district so as to not disturb the many foreign nationals that resided there.

The May 4th Incident was in direct opposition to these long-standing colonial practices - hence their slogan of “Protect China’s Sovereignty!” as they marched. The passionately nationalistic students were acting on their frustrations towards China's endemic exploitation at the hands of foreign powers, exemplified by the most recent treatment of Shandong. Japan in particular was opposed not only due to its requisition of Shandong, but also because of its increasing imperialist tendencies, most recently displayed with its 1915  ‘Twenty-One Demands’ to the Chinese government stipulating wide economic and territorial concessions.

Furthermore, the students’ were not blind in their anti-imperialism; they also held their own government to account for the nation’s weakness. After all, the government in Beijing had been disastrously ineffective for years. The students were living in the immediate aftermath of the defacto collapse of the Republic of China in 1916. In this aftermath warlords - regional military leaders - had emerged to divide the country into their own personal kingdoms. These warlords ruled tyrannically, taxing and looting peasants with extreme violence to raise armies and live in personal luxury. The so-called ‘central government’ in Beijing - in reality it had virtually no authority outside of the capital - was completely impotent in controlling the chaos. It was this same government that had acquiesced to the colonial powers over Shandong - the ‘National Traitors’ the students were calling out as they marched were the pro-Japan officials Cao Rulin, Zhang Zongxiang and Lu Zongyu in the Beijing government who had agreed with the Conference’s decision. Indeed, the official that was beaten that day on May 4th was Zhang Zongxiang; the building that was burned down, his temporary residence, belonged to Cao Rulin.


## The Strike:
The May 4th Incident, even though it ended in police suppression, was not the end for the students. As we in the modern day Hong Kong democracy movement must be intimately familiar, police brutality often serves to invigorate rather than frighten, instilling feelings of sympathy and rage that easily translate into action. As with students in Hong Kong today, so with those students in Beijing a century ago - they were driven into action by the same feelings that we are motivated by today.

It was thus that, on May 6th, the first citywide student organisation in Chinese history was formed in Beijing. In the weeks following its creation, the ‘Union of Secondary and Above Students’ worked to organise street speeches, a boycott of Japanese goods, and irregular student strikes. On May 19th its strength was on full display when 25, 000 Beijing students went on a general student strike in spite of the Beijing government’s increasingly aggressive attempts to crackdown on their activities, including a ramping up of police presence and a ban on student publications.

But events in Shanghai soon overtook even these dramatic mobilisation in Beijing. Inspired by the bravery of the Beijing students, as well as horrified by their treatment, it was already on May 6th that students across 33 Shanghai campuses coordinated to hold a 3, 000 person rally and march, later forming their own student organisation: ‘the Shanghai Student Union’. The Union was extraordinarily well organised: it drove massive propaganda campaigns to flood the streets with student street-side lectures and tens of thousands of leaflets, hosted extravagant marches and rallies and, following the example of Beijing, coordinated a general student strike on May 26th. Indeed, the discipline of the students themselves for the sake of their cause was nothing short of astonishing: their ideal daily schedules were ruthless and emulated military discipline, including waking up at 6:00AM and spending upwards of six hours each day for political activities while still retaining time for studying.

The crowning achievement of the intense labour of the Shanghai students was the June 5th general strike, which was called in response to an incident a few days prior when hundreds of students in Beijing were beaten and arrested. It proceeded to paralyse all trade within the city for a week, with an estimated 60, 000 - 100, 000 workers participating. Strikes also spread nationwide, to cities including Hangzhou and Tianjin.

It was with the inauguration of the general strike that the primarily student character of the May 4th Movement was stripped off and replaced by a primarily working class character. The Movement had finally grabbed hold of the vast economic power of the Chinese working classes and merchants, whose labour the Beijing government, warlords and colonial powers depended on for resources, profits and exploitation. Of course, that is not to say the students did not play a leading role in the strike. While many of the workers and merchants who formed the core of the strike were genuinely angered by the same injustice’s that motivated the students, the students kept this core stable and coordinated. Through the crucial organisational apparatus of the Shanghai Student Union, the students practically replaced the duties of official authorities. Patrolling the streets in “group of ten” brigades and decked out in uniform and badges, the students “persuaded” (sometimes with intimidation) shopkeepers reluctant to forgo profits to join the strike, prevented Chinese workers from attacking Japanese nationals so as to prevent the strike from devolving into anarchy, and distributed thousands of leaflets on every wall and corner to urge citizens to join the strike and remind them of the need to maintain order. However, in the final analysis the driving force of the movement was the bargaining power of the workers, which was only guided, not replaced by, the activities of the students.

The foreigners who resided in the Shanghai International Settlement - a strip of land in Shanghai where privileges had been granted to Western citizens as a result of past ‘unequal treaties’ - were opposed to the strike. With a few echoes to the expat community in the present in Hong Kong, they had tolerated the student protests that had come before, but found the situation unbearable once their servants found it impossible to buy food or their chauffeurs went on strike. Indeed, as much as by anarchy, the Western authorities were frightened by the order demonstrated by the students. Seeing the students so disciplined made them worried that the duties of the government and police were being usurped, and therefore colonial power eroded.

Nonetheless, despite repressive measures, the strike triumphed in June 10th with the dismissal of the ‘National Traitors’ Cao Rulin, Lu Zongyu and Zhang Zongxiang. Where the mosquito bites of student speeches and class strikes had failed, the economic hammer of a general, working class strike had succeeded. The mood jubilant, the strike ended on June 12th with parades and firecrackers filling the streets of Shanghai.


## Mr Science and Mr Democracy:
The celebration upon the end of the strike was somewhat misleading, however, as the dismissal of hated officials fell far below the ultimate goals of the movement. But this says more about the student’s ideals than of the inadequacy of the achievement - the victory could only fall below the goals of the movement because the aim of the students was placed so high. This goal was nothing short of the radical democratic transformation of Chinese society.

The roots of the May 4th Movement’s democratic orientation lay in an accompanying and deeply intertwined sister movement, the New Culture Movement. Launched by primarily young intellectuals a few years prior to the May 4th Movement, the participants of the New Culture Movement, like the students during the initial stage of the May 4th Movement, were deeply concerned with China’s national weakness. However, while they criticised imperialism and the incompetent national government, they identified the main source of the nation’s woes deeper than any surface economic and political issues.

To the New Culture Movement intellectuals, China was sick at its cultural core. China’s Confucian and feudal traditions, through their conservative tents of respecting authority and hierarchy, were massive obstacles to creating a democratic egalitarian China, in addition to stifling the technological innovation that could modernise away China’s economic poverty. Further, the social practices that Chinese culture justified, such as the patriarchal Chinese family, concubinage and foot binding, were viewed as oppressive towards women and individual freedom. All these archaic traditions were to be cast away in favour of the model of the progressive West for the sake of China’s national strength.

Chen Duxiu, who founded the New Youth journal that served as a lightning rod for New Culture thought, provided the most famous articulation of the movement’s goals. Chen called for “Mr Confucius” that had dominated China in the past to be replaced by “Mr Science” - progressive and reason-based cultural attitudes and technology - and “Mr Democracy”. This social transformation was to be achieved by a intellectual and cultural “renaissance” or “awakening” within China: unlike the May 4th Movement emphasis on political resistance, the New Culture Movement, or at least certain intellectuals within it, preferred to cause change through education and enlightenment.

But who was “Mr Democracy” for the New Culture intellectuals? The concept of democracy certainly played a guiding role in New Culture thought. Fu Sinian, an editor of the 1919 magazine New Tide, affirmed that democracy “as the representative of brightness is the sustenance of all our hope and happiness in the future”. Meanwhile, Chen Duxiu, with clear influences from the Enlightenment thinker Rousseau, stated that “the democratic state is the genuine state, in which the state is the public property for all the citizens, people are the masters of the country, and the rulers are servants of the people.” As such, democracy went hand in hand with nationalism: it was only through a democratic government that represented the people - or in the eyes of some intellectuals, was directly constituted by the people through varieties of direct democracy - that the wish of the people for national strength could be fulfilled.

Such ideas, at least in their broad outline, will be very familiar to pro-democracy fighters in Hong Kong. But they were given a additional populist spin as the May 4th Movement gained its working class character. Increasingly intellectuals called for ‘economic democracy’, or for the cause of democracy to be aligned with workers. ‘Economic democracy’, which was at its most broad called for the diminishing of economic inequality with some elements of anti-capitalism, was seen as an extension of ‘political democracy’, which included the right to vote, in that both attempted to eradicate domination - the latter the domination of despots, the former the domination of capitalists. This trend would see its most extreme expression in varieties of anarchism, utopian socialism, and ‘Marxism’ later emerging. Indeed, the Chinese Communist Party itself was born from the radical political winds of the May 4th Movement.

While the New Culture Movement’s project of ‘enlightening’ the masses towards progressive views ultimately never succeeded, the espousal of its ideals by the May 4th Movement along with May 4th’s effective political activity would inspire a host of democratic social movements in China throughout the 20th Century. But that’s a story for another time.


The May 4th Legacy in China and Hong Kong Today:
On May 4th 2019, the centennial anniversary of the beginning of the May 4th Movement, President Xi Jinping gave a speech at Beijing’s Great Hall of People in Tiananmen Square, near where the Beijing student’s had rallied so long ago. He urged students to learn from the May 4th Movement, claiming that it demonstrated the value of “loving the motherland” and “obeying the party”.

This is an obvious opportunistic corruption of the spirit of May 4th. The May 4th Movement was indeed intensely nationalistic, but its nationalism was a critical one that is completely antithetical to the CCP’s dreams of authoritarian Chinese hegemony. After all, though criticising imperialist powers, the main opponent of the May 4th students was ultimately their own national government which had betrayed the interests of the people. In addition, they tied their nationalism to a desire for a democratic China. Indeed, the New Culture Movement believed that the source of China’s weakness was precisely its traditional institutions and culture - hardly a view that led to mindless praise of all that was Chinese, least of all the Chinese government.

Most importantly, the example of the May 4th Movement reveals the potential for mass resistance from Chinese people themselves. The purpose of this historical series from Voices of Democracy is to combat the too often heard view that the Mainland Chinese are ‘brainwashed nationalists’, with no potential for revolutionary activity. We point out that the May 4th Movement stands as an awkward contradiction to this view. The movement was fueled precisely by nationalism, if with a critical character, and had great achievements despite severe repression from the State. The Hong Kong movement is handicapping itself by accepting Chinese State propaganda of a docile Chinese populace as a fact - this only blinds ourselves to opportunities for the struggle in Hong Kong to fuel a democratic movement in Mainland China. 

Furthermore, rather than impulsively opposing everything ‘Chinese’ in our struggle against the CCP, we in Hong Kong should claim the May 4th Movement for ourselves. The Hong Kong people ARE Chinese, not because we subordinate ourselves to the CCP or because we have a homogenous culture, but because we are the true legacy of progressive Chinese movement’s like the May 4th Movement.

It is only by asserting ourselves as the legacy of the May 4th Movement that its lessons can be truly learned. Though the current Hong Kong movement has many admirable qualities, it has evidently yet been unable to adopt a truly working class character, as can be seen from successive failed calls for a general strike. To repeat: student protests, even at their most violent, are but mosquito bites. As shown by the Shanghai general strike, the economic activity which forms the foundation of the ruling classes can only be crushed by the economic hammer of the working class. STUDENTS CAN LEAD THE MOVEMENT, BUT WORKERS MUST FORM THE CORE. Correspondingly, the Hong Kong movement’s dislike of organisation is contradicted by the achievements of the May 4th Movement students. It was only through the highly efficient and coordinated apparatus of the Shanghai Student Union that effective resistance could be mounted, especially the Shanghai general strike. There is always an abstract threat of poor leadership, but this is a problem to be overcome, not completely avoided.

The New Culture Movement’s intellectual tendencies must also be appreciated. The symptoms of the Hong Kong movement’s lack of theory is expressed by its focus on tactics - debate within the movement often centers purely on the extent to which violence should be used. Yet, theory is vital for the health of any movement. The New Culture Movement’s view that the source of China’s authoritarianism lies in its culture can and has been questioned, but nonetheless its fundamental method of identifying the primary obstacles to democracy in something other than authoritarian government opponents - namely in the conservative behaviours of the oppressed themselves - is something that can only critically strengthen the Hong Kong movement. We should investigate and criticise the ideologies and practices among the people that inhibit democratic transformation, such as the Confucian treasuring of order as an end in itself. It is only when we have clarified where obstacles to freedom lie that we can truly effectively transform society in a democratic direction. 

Finally, the ideas of ‘economic democracy’ that the New Culture Movement developed should be integrated into the Hong Kong movement. That Hong Kong pro-democracy fighters refuse to raise any demand for the economic transformation of Hong Kong, even when one-in-five Hong Kongers live in poverty, is not only a theoretical, but also a tactical weakness. After all, the desirability of democracy is a vital component of its very existence, not just an ornament. A movement for democracy survives only as long as it is valued in the heart and soul of the people; as long as the people are willing to struggle for its ideological goals. Without formulating a democratic society that addresses the socioeconomic issues that oppress the people as much as the CCP would do with any extradition bill, as the May 4th Movement did, the Hong Kong movement cannot survive, let alone gain the vital support of the working class.

Liberate Hong Kong,
The Revolution of Our Times.
And Long Live the Spirit of May 4th!








On May 4th, 1919, over 4, 000 students from universities and colleges from all around Beijing marched in coordinated effort towards Tiananmen Square. Along the way their slogans of “Protect China’s Sovereignty!” and “Get Rid of the National Traitors!” filled the air, clearly expressing their cause: to protest the central government’s weakness both domestically and internationally.

Following the overthrow of the Qing Dynasty in 1911, and the subsequent end of the short-lived Republic of China in 1916, China had been fragmented into regional warlords who pursued their personal gain, primarily through violent conflict, at the expense of the national interest. The government in Beijing was hardly better: a ‘central government’ in name only, it was completely impotent in unifying the country, resorting to repression in the areas it did control to prevent dissent. Even worse, immediately before May 4th the central government had acquiesced to imperialist powers in negotiations over the 1919 Treaty of Versailles. Despite China being on the winning-side in WWI, the Western powers and Japan in writing the Treaty refused to comply with Chinese demands to end past ‘unequal treaties’ - imperialist treaties that gave unequal special treatment to foreigners, including establishing territories within China that were exempt from Chinese law and where even Chinese citizens were denied entry. Most humiliating was how the island of Shandong, which had been a colony of the now-defeated Germany, was granted to Japan instead of returned to its original possessor China.
